Stack, Procedure Calls, Exceptions
==================================
October 9, 2012
---------------

The homework this week is pretty much just things you're working on: how
did you implement j and jal? We are going to talk about the stack and
procedure calls, and also exceptions (interrupts!) -- 6.7.2, 7.7. Also,
look at your green sheet.

From the book, like we drew last time, we've got our memory allocation
system that starts at 0, and somewhere way at the top, we've got FFFFFFFC,
which gets chopped up into pieces. In particular, in the normal memory map,
all of this is reserved, which ends up being memory-mapped IO devices, and
you start off with your stack pointer pointing right here at 7FFFFFFC, and
then you've got another reserved section on the bottom for text, static,
and room for your stack to grow down and your heap to grow up, and your
stack pointer and global pointer. Your program counter ends up being
initialized at the bottom of the text section.

Some differences.

How do we do procedure calls? In our book, that's section 6.4.6. We'll look
at it from the simplest no args, no ret val, then we'll see how to do args
and return values, then local and global variables. Your code is main, just
calls a function simple, and simple, which is a void, just returns.

61C material. `jr $ra`. Turns out that doesn't work for a MIPS
architecture. What is the address that goes into the return address when
this is called? 0x8: book does not have delay slots. In particular, you're
going to have to put NOPs to get this to work. Actually, at memory location
1004, you just happened to have an instruction that was all 0, except it
had a 1000 at the very end. That's `jr`, so we end up with nastiness:
infinite looping, potentially.


So suppose I have args and stuff. We end up with `\$s0 = y`. Suppose we're
at 1000, how does this thing get called? `\$a` registers, `\$v` registers. 

Utilization of delay slots.

